the publication of what have become
known as the Pentagon Papers by first
the New York Times then the Washington
Post and now probably just about every
newspaper in the United States has
reopened debate discussion about
American involvement in Indochina that
hadn't been at quite this level of
interest or excitement or heat in quite
some time I have with me in the studio
eight KPFA today a group of people all
of whom are eminently qualified to talk
not only about some of the specific
things that are contained in the
so-called Pentagon Papers but also to
provide context some interpretation of
specific things that are in the papers
some of the things that are not in the
papers this we expect will be the first
of two programs will focus more directly
on specific events that are recorded in
that forty some volume study our second
discussion will await the publication of
at least the New York Times full series
and hopefully will be a little bit more
concerned with present realities and
contingencies than this discussion is
today my guests are going around the
table Bannen garrett was with the
pacific study center Center which is in
Palo Alto and the Asia editor of
ramparts Peter Dale Scott who was from
Sherman is an author of the politics of
escalation Jim Peck of the Bay Area
Institute from Sherman of the Bay Area
Institute also an author of politics of
escalation Marty gellan of the Bay Area
Institute and John Livingston who is
with the Bulletin of Concerned Asian
scholars everyone who's here today all
of you are familiar to people as having
authored and spoken out against the war
and against the making of the policies
that have continued that war for more
than a decade and the the place where we
might well begin is with you telling us
what you have learned from the
publication of the Pentagon Papers has
it been primarily a confirmation of
information that you had before some
additional pieces of information but
basically a confirmation of the
interpretation that or provides you with
information that can reconfirm that
those those interpretations that you
have stated publicly before or are
they're really new pieces of evidence
here that are going to lead you to
reevaluate some of the either particular
interpretations or general statements
that you've made in the past
I don't know who'd like to begin Franz
well just to get the ball rolling and
and speaking as someone who's been a
Washington ologists now for five or six
years that first thing I'd like to say
is that the you really have got to read
those papers again and again I mean you
can't just you know go through the
Chronicle versions and then decide that
you've known it
I've been reading him steadily now in
the various bits and pieces that have
appeared in a variety of newspapers and
their Institute has been trying to
collect as much as we can of it and I
find myself again and again going back
to the very first piece that came out on
one was at Sunday the was at the 13th of
this year reading Cheyenne's piece which
by the way I think is quite a good piece
I do feel she Anna's neo she and has
been by all odds the best of the
analysts on the Pentagon Papers as I
reread that first that first piece all
sorts of new things come out that I
didn't see on the second or the third
reading so it's a kind of consciousness
expansion process which I certainly
people have the time I recommend to
everyone because there's nothing there's
nothing I mean some people may have a
bit more knowledge and a bit more
information but I mean everyone can do
the same thing if they just are willing
to read it and read it and read it so on
and lots and lots of things come out and
people here around the table of course
will have different feelings about it
I can just state some of my own ideas
very briefly on it one certainly there
are nuggets of information very
interesting nuggets information that are
buried both in the documents out in the
analyses and these nuggets do not appear
right away I suppose it's like nuggets
of gold that you've got to wash the sand
away for a while
secondly there are very notable
omissions as I think will bring out and
during this during this discussion this
mentioned one of them all the analyses
get remarkably vague right around the
period of the Kennedy assassination even
though we know that there were very
important documents on Vietnam included
in that collection the third thing I
would say is that the the the for me
what I saw as not exactly new but it
reconfirmed that is the vigor and
audaciousness with which right at the
very early very early days of the
Johnson administration the United States
plunged very heavily into the war there
are a lot of interpretations of what
this could mean and I think the general
idea that Eisenhower Truman got us into
it then Eisenhower than Kennedy's
absolutely correct but there was a very
definite turning point right around the
time the Kennedy assassination
particularly in regard to the whole
issue of the bombing of North Vietnam
which not as far as I know has not
prominently discussed before that period
just lastly the the feeling I have that
the sense one has if one goes through
the bland bureaucratic verbiage after
all this was written by bureaucrats
within the power structure and a lot of
inhibitions which they had to observe
but the real sense of bitter power
struggles bitter bureaucratic conflicts
bitter juxtaposition conflict of
interests that were going on in the
Washington government I I get a sense of
within the power structure reads these
things a kind of viciousness I think
that as an callousness that is indicated
by Barry Goldwater's remark that was
today published in The Chronicle where
Barry said well we should have just
bombed them all at the bomb them high
fall into a mud puddle somebody said
well what about though a thousand
civilians that would have been killed so
Goldwater says very blindly well better
they get killed over there we get killed
over here but that kind of viciousness
not just directed against the inferior
agents which is which is quite obvious
and from there from the document
something Ellsbury's already alluded to
but the viciousness toward each other
one does not get the picture of sincere
men honestly seeking solutions but of of
men caught in in and struggles with each
other and pursuing a whole series of
goals and and fighting tooth and nail
and certain interests came out and
taught mothers did not Peter can I just
pick up from there and say that although
I think almost everyone in America now
is aware of the amount of deception that
accompanied the key us decisions to
escalate in 64 and 65 is often seen as
an escalation as a deception of the
people by the bureaucracy and and what
these documents confirm I think we
suspected it before is a tremendous
amount of deception that was going on
within the bureaucracy the the
manipulation of intelligence the
suppression of vital intelligence so
that many people didn't know about key
events in South Vietnam which were
evidence of covert yet covert us actions
to heat up the war in that area until
long after key decisions have been made
and in in the case of the people framing
the reports maybe even years after that
now of course there's always a kind of
bureaucratic perspective in bureaucratic
documents limitations on what they see
and they don't see and that is as one
might expect reflected in these
documents they talk about a patent law
invasion in May of 64 and most of us
believe that no such invasion occurred
or if it did it was in response to
provocations from our side they talk
about the second
Tonkin Gulf incident as if it really
occurred and many of us believe that it
didn't it was again I should say as is
well-known all right yes so that I would
like to warn people against thinking
that they're going to get the real truth
somehow by simply reading these
documents but they will get if they read
attentive attentively are clues buried
as France said nuggets buried in these
documents which indicate the role of
covert operations in adding to the
pressures for escalation at that time we
should remember that most of these
documents come from the White House from
the Department of Defense and from the
State Department so what we have from
the CIA is usually in the forms of
intelligence analyses of what is going
on covert operations as such which were
really the cutting edge of the u.s.
involvement Southeast Asia aren't
reported at all but we do get clues
little hints and that's what I hope in
this program we can begin to get to been
well I just have one thing that as I get
the sense that and reading his paper
though though everything you said is
true about deception within the
bureaucracy bad intelligence etcetera
that that the two things seem to me
relatively clear one as they had fairly
few illusions about how bad the
situation was the fact they were engaged
in it what we would call war against the
entire population of it any sense that
they had a an easy victory was it was
not there and essentially then that they
are mucking around the whole time
without any feeling at the lights at the
end of the tunnel you know I don't get
that sense from read the documents that
they felt they were into some they make
I just you know if they come up with a
correct line they just you know wrap it
up in a six months or a year 18 months
and then be the end of it I have a sense
that that a lot of their these power
struggles that France comes about are
because of the objective situation
they're in which is one was they
couldn't win and in a lot of ways they
knew that and they knew that they you
know all these are sort of been holding
operations for ten years and in Vietnam
and in fact they say explicitly it's
better to do it even if we don't win
yeah right that kind of thing which you
know leads to a whole different
discussion but I think it is important
to have that sense of it to that it's
not merely because bad intelligence are
bad modes of operation that they
couldn't so he said get themselves
together on this at the situation they
faced was one that was essentially
hopeless from the beginning and the
arguments were over how to hold it
together and some some fashion or
another but none of them having nobody
having it there wasn't a
so that that all these these different
approaches were all in a sense equally
valid and invalid the entire operation
of the last ten years let's try to
eliminate some of these general
perceptions by focusing on specific
periods of American operations in
Vietnam that are that are covered in the
documents you mentioned Peter that a
critical period or maybe was you Francis
that a particularly critical period was
the period immediately preceding the
assassination of John Kennedy in
November 1963 that there are some
problems with the documents in this
period but perhaps this as a period of
time when decisions were being made
information was being clumped in
decisions were being taken that would
culminate in the massive escalation of
the war within a year to 18 months
perhaps this would be a good period of
time to do a first quick focusing in on
the documents who'd like to begin on
that promise well since I raised the
subject maybe I can throw it a few ideas
if you read the the she ins articles and
you read the documents not just in the
times but in other publications one
thing comes out very clear namely that
according to national security council
directive 273 formulated on four days
after the assassination on November 26th
on the basis of a meeting as we know
from the press that occurred two days
before in the White House I would say
Sunday the morning before even Lee
Harvey Oswald was assassinated a major
document committing the United States to
what an effect would be victory in
Vietnam was authorized now on the basis
of that document you find in very
January January 2nd 1964 in fact Colonel
or I guess was Colonel Krulak who was
one of the people who was involved in in
the scene before the assassination of
Kennedy and in September in October of
1963 making plow suggesting plans to the
Joint Chiefs of Staff and to the White
House for covert operations against
North Vietnam which were subsequently
known as the 34a
ops 34a operations and these 434 a
operations involved actions not only
against North Vietnam but against the
so-called border control operations
against Laos and Cambodia those
operations interesting Lee and Peter may
have something a saying that began
almost in the very day that that
generals own van Ming or big Ming was
overthrown and the first of the military
to aside from Ming general yang Kang
seized power in in South Vietnam also at
that time the end of January the Joint
Chiefs of Staff raised for the first
time the possibility of the actual
bombing of North Vietnam now we know
that Walt Whitman Rostow had proposed
that as early as 1961 but rasta was not
a major figure policy making our policy
advising figure during the Kennedy
administration even though he went out
to to South Vietnam at that time he was
in the policy planning staff of the
State Department which was not an
important bureaucracy at that time but
otherwise none of the documents is
anything mentioned about bombing such
doesn't appear on the other hand what is
rather prominently mentioned ended up in
the documents is shooting I probably
mentioned but mentioned and not enough
detail going into is the fact that the
United States that the Kennedy
administration adopted a program for the
withdrawal of troops from Vietnam which
was publicly announced in October 2nd
1963 for the first time a plan which
according to Christian Science Monitor
will star to be formulated in nineteen
nineteen sixty-two at the time of the
agreement for the neutralization of Laos
but which is not publicly announced on
October 2nd 1963 on November 20th two
days before the assassination a very
important Honolulu conference to place
these Honolulu conferences have been
very important as through the Vietnam
War
they've occurred in various periods at
that Honolulu conference only one public
announcement was made that United States
would withdraw a thousand troops by
December 1963 a thousand troops were not
withdrawn and one of the documents
called the ricean called as an
accounting operation I mean they sent in
as many new troops they pulled out but
anyway that was the official
announcement or at least the one thing
that came out of the Honolulu conference
now what Kennedy had in mind as far as
withdrawal from Vietnam is concerned we
don't know can I interrupt Francis let
me just finish when I'm finished here in
one second the point I wanted to make
here in terms of the public hate of the
documents themselves the talk of
withdrawal Peters out there's this
there's a reaffirm a weak reaffirmation
of an NSC 273 four days after the
assassination a few more very weak refer
references to it subsequently and by the
spring of that year it's completely
forgotten I mean it's a sort of like a
policy that fizzled out the point I
wanna make here is that these documents
does nothing I've seen so far from that
Honolulu conference of November 20th
1963 attended by every major official
including Dean Rusk and Robert Strange
McNamara with one exception John McCone
the head of the CIA he was not there
explicitly not there all the McCone
plays a very key role in the immediately
after the assassination in the
conference's with with Johnson I'm yet
nama Cohen is a very hard liner
completely in favor of 34a ops and sort
of hardline sort of operations I just
let us I'll turn it over to Peter other
people now that the key point here is on
what obviously if not a reversal of
policy certainly a rather remarkable
shift of policy occurred right at the
time the Kennedy assassination these
documents and the analytical articles
are very very silent the gloss over them
if I could just add to that that that
same October second announcement from
the White House which talked about
withdrawals from of a thousand by the
end of the year also talked about
withdrawing the bulk of the troops by
the end of 1965 and since then Ken
O'Donnell is written in Life magazine
that Kennedy had actually told him in
April of 63 that he did intend to do
this and to announce it after the
election in 1964 my I I think we haven't
been given NSA M 273 yet and I
really we'll have been waiting with more
bated breath present today's edition of
times a very short version of it there
is there isn't today's version of time
very because Chester Cooper in his book
and Cooper was an intelligence officer
was at the heart of these deliberations
says that a decision was made shortly
after the assassination which was that
all military and economic programs were
to be kept at the levels maintained
during the CM regime now that's a direct
quotation and although he doesn't spell
it out it means that the policy of
withdrawing troops had been quietly
reversed and if in fact as it now
appears that decision was made two days
after the assassination it's a
tremendously important fact which is not
coming out with the publication's so far
really of these Pentagon Papers what was
going on here who are the important
actors in in Washington in this period
what what could have led to this this
apparent turnabout within a reasonably
short period of time is there is there
some new fund of information or well
there's some there's both new and old
information there's a lot of information
actually in Hill's man's book to move an
issue and a variety of other
publications but in terms of what comes
out in the documents that right before
before the CM assassination you get the
picture of two conflicting groups and
among the Americans in South Vietnam
symbolized by Harkins and lodge the
Ambassador lodge and Harkins the
commander of the American military
commander in South Vietnam and then
Kennedy sends out to people to Vietnam
one Colonel Krulak and one Joe
Mendenhall from the State Department and
they come with two conflicting reports
this is already reported in Hills man's
book so one says that things are going
fine Krulak says everything is beautiful
in Vietnam we're winning the war and
mendenhall says it's a mess we're losing
so Kennedy says well what are you have
you been to the same country I mean that
remark is in Hillsman spoken has been
reported earlier but one gets the sense
of to that's to say that the command
structure harkens command structure and
lodges chain of command were separate
and the relationships between them were
very bad Harkins clearly was involved
with the military and I'm just I don't
know I mean IIIi do think that the
documents indicate a real split in the
CIA I mean mokona and Richardson on the
hardline side and other people colonel
canaan co nain and others may be
Hillsman himself all the Hillsman was at
least theoretically in the view of
intelligence and research but anyway
there is that conflict and the the only
one side of the conflict is clear and
that aside the military side wanted to
win the war against communism that's
clear this is the American military
American military side I'm not talking
about the Vietnamese but Kulik and the
Admiral Harry Beldon refers to his
report in 64 refers to the country team
being split who does yeah the country
team was split and they what you talked
right rime he explicitly he was right
and it's it's becomes clear in the
documents now the military I think was
for winning the war against communism
whatever that meant yeah exactly what
the other side was doing the side that
was plotting against um as I say lodge
and Hillsman and and Canaan and a lot of
these people is very unclear to me Logan
those we have to win with the support of
the Vietnamese people we're not going to
do it on our own that was one of the
clear issues before the assassination
that it could not be a unilateral u.s.
airport we would the u.s. role was a
support role and a helping role and
Kennedy reaffirmed that in September
what are the relations of these two two
groups in the American mission in South
Vietnam two political groups or military
groups in South Vietnamese themselves
the the geums regime and and so on
well that let me just maybe others could
speak more informally on that let me
just say that of those two groups the
one group was purged one American group
was purged immediately after the
assassination roger Hillsman was fired
in january 1964 roger Hillsman by the
way also gave a speech here in San
Francisco on December 10th 1963
advocating better relations with China
was the first time any administration
person had sounded at that theme then
that was the end of Hillsman
that policy until the present situation
evolved what one thing one can say
definitely that that whole group larger
of course remained on his ambassador but
the Hillsman who played a very key role
was purged he was out in January 1964
started with the you could say with the
transfer of power that occurs it was all
the assassination the military group
symbolized by Krulak and and of course
the whole military chain of command JC
essence sink back in Honolulu they won
out in other words in the powers in that
power struggle centering around the
assassination period the military group
won out against whatever kind of group
Kennedy had gathered around himself that
was involved the plotting against the EM
but what was the situation in South
Vietnam ahead time
this is very interesting conception
because it it seems to tie what was
happening with in Vietnam of what had
been going on in terms of the American
caught the American presence there with
the very top level decisions in this
split and then finally a resolution of
the split with the military winning
because Webb and my understanding of
u.s. involvement in Vietnam since
probably 54 the 54 to 63 was really this
New Deal liberalism reformism that was
really involved particularly the
professor's MSU people probably State
Department any idea all these people who
who went in with the attitude not so
much of straight any communism but much
more of you know diem the new FDR the
FDR Vietnam and we're going to in a
build a just democratic liberal state
and tried one thing after another of
course they're always caught this
contradiction of order and justice right
I mean they have to establish order in
order to proceed with justice but
nevertheless a consciousness that we're
trying to build this liberal democratic
state not just an any communist thrust
and in 63 particularly with the
assassination the entire pacification
program just collapsed and all
everything they had done not only had on
the one hand that they see that every
reform ended up their building of a
police state apparatus and it's
centralizing political power rather than
D centralizing and all this
contradiction happening but the very
program itself that just collapsed by 63
and the innocence Johnson's correct I'm
making the decision go to the military
decision that the whole New Deal
liberalism approach to solving the
problem American control of the Vietnam
was bankrupt by then and it seems to be
that solution then was either to pull
out or go to the millet to tried
military solution which obviously was
led to work where the situation is now
but it's a perceptions at the top and
essential seem to me to correct as to
what was going on in that in the choices
and that that Hillsman and they and they
you know with better idea people you
know when when when the people were with
a better idea than communism had failed
they'd had their try they have seven
years or eight years whatever it was and
it was bankrupt he so-called nation
builders not to be none of whom spoke
Vietnamese and a great many of whom
doesn't even speak French and they would
arrive and get on a briefcase full of
plans and often both US dollar bills and
you'd think that they could somehow
manipulate some kind of alternative
structures it's a very pathetic scene is
is this in fact what they were trying to
do is is to create a viable alternative
structure to that that was being
developed by the insurgency yeah that's
what still goes on right I mean they
only had co-opted all those terms right
revolutionary development relative and
every attempt to co-opt with the danoi
was doing but more Mormon by the time
it's a massive invasion of US troops of
a half a million troops I mean it's like
they're countered so this is going to
stray but we might say the
counterinsurgency model theoretical
model this really seems to me a switch
from the early model with Lansdale and
McNamara Hillsman and Rasta these people
was really the better idea mom well when
will when the peasants winning the
hearts and mind and by 65 when that had
collapsed their theory best put forward
by Charles wolf of the RAND Corporation
was behavioristic model well forget
about trying to win their hearts and
minds because you can't do it we'll just
control their behavior through reward
and Punishment Lincoln and Huntington's
a logical culmination of that basically
organization I think that's working out
a program in that line it's interesting
so think that in a sense these kinds of
arguments don't emerge very strongly in
these talk
partly because they're Pentagon
documents and their reflection of the
kind of documentation that was going on
within the military itself I my feeling
is that this is why in a sense we
sometimes think more in terms of shifts
in decisions in Kennedy because I think
that where Peter was right it's the
covert side of the operation that was
Kennedy's contribution to this effort
and it was the nation-building and all
that paraphernalia that was part of it
too but the military becomes very
involved in that crucial period with
Kennedy's assassination I mean that's
when you start to see it really emerging
in the documentation we don't know too
much about that yet but I think that in
looking at at this particular period and
you're and you're trying to analyze the
the shift in forces you have to remember
the kind of documents you're looking at
and these are pentagon documents but
also that some of the the critics in a
sense are those who are arguing for
different strategies happen to be in
many cases people who were around
Kennedy personally and they were part of
his entourage or they were people that
came in through him but during this
period of time most all the major
bureaucracies themselves were already
committed to the effort and they were
had various types of programs it would
have taken I think a major reversal of
policy to have pulled back from this and
with Kennedy's assassination who is
somewhat aware of the situation he was
involved in theaters only entourage you
find a whole group of people sliding out
and a bureaucratic momentum can come
into a much fuller operation when the
head man is gone and you're in a period
of transition and therefore you have to
offer up to a new person here are the
ABCs alternatives and then you have the
more clear-cut military approach I think
emerges in this time is what happens
then kind of shifting of the spotlight
formerly it had been one aspect of some
interrelated elements of American policy
that had been spotlighted that the kind
of civilian building a different kind of
governmental and political structure in
Vietnam that can successfully resist the
the insurgency of the NLF
now partly because perhaps that isn't
working so well or as failed completely
partly because the other thing has new
advocates the the the overt side the
more militant militant military aspect
is now what what will become spotlighted
in sixty four is that was happening in
Washington well see I think what pink
said is I think that's correct
see that that the word sort of to
counter insurgency policies the wind the
hearts and the minds you know by the
rasta was not of the win the hearts of
the minds I mean he was much more bomb
in fact he his documents are some of the
most ferocious in that whole collection
but that and the other is missing that
that's what's really critical out of
these documents that is not there's some
kind of a major shift which we can infer
from what happened afterwards that is
totally blank and in fact that the near
of time seems to sort of miss the point
by portraying this whole thing is the US
was not involved in the or even cm while
a major shift and thinking was going on
behind the scenes
either they decided that wasn't
important or they just missed it it's
not obvious what's going on there Epis I
didn't get your last point John but in
other words the The Times has portrayed
this holes this whole period of
decision-making is one in which the CIA
was was vaguely involved with the
generals who were overthrown as iam
concluding it they were not involved in
a major way
while we're inferring from the from
reading and very close reading of the
documents that in fact what was going on
was a major shift in thinking in the
military in terms of what was going to
where wasn't waiting after the
assassination I'm not sure if I would
say there's a shift is so much in
thinking as South Vietnamese military in
decision-making locus because I one of
the things which strikes ones about the
Tet Pentagon Papers again given where
those documents are from I don't think
you find a rare affirmation of
pacification programs and winning hearts
and minds it's just not there are the
documents one reason I think Rostov was
featured in these documents Munich
sixties he didn't believe it either and
fits very much into the kind of pentagon
documentation that was going on and
there's a kind of a chomping at the bit
of people sitting back now I have the
feeling in these early two years 61 to
63 of people saying when are they going
to wake up and say yeah I think this is
where there's a danger of misperception
by looking too closely only at Pentagon
Papers because the Pentagon didn't
really change in this period what
changed was the White House kennedy was
clearly becoming more in
or disenchanted particularly as Election
Day was approaching with the whole
effort and was beginning to tell his
confidants not his bureaucratic
confidence but his political personal
confidant said that he was thinking of
alternate ways of disengagement this
created tremendous suspicion and
mistrust and recriminations in
Washington Washington was a very bad
mood those last two months before the
assassination Johnson was identified as
a man who believed in the in the
Pentagon and essentially I think what
happened in that first meeting
afterwards that Johnson reiterated his
position of before the assassination
which he had always been against the
coup against GM he had always been for
giving the generals what was needed and
he was going to see that they got it and
so that that's what I think Darren has
to look beyond the papers you know I
think that's that that is a good point
what one thing as always struck me is
the the rapidity with which the meeting
was held and it's aside two days after
the assassination and while most of us
were reading the you know and that
Sunday is clear at whose request this
meeting was held or instigation no that
doesn't come clear in the documents I
advise people to go back and look at the
New York Times of Monday the Monday
after the all of us are reading the news
on the assassination and forgot that
there were some items on the Vietnam so
it's actually in there and find in the
library but what what's always struck me
is the urgency and this may this brings
us back to the South Vietnamese
situation and I think a point for the
readers of the documents that when the
documents are for the South Vietnamese
generals one has sort of an image of two
and key and and and you know these sort
of various generals who are at the beck
and call of the United States but
actually no not so the generals referred
to essentially general big Ming and in
fact a whole series of generals who were
when was it retired bike eyeing there
there was later after kaaya seized power
in January 6 and end of January 64 at
some point all these generals were
retired now these generals and they
emerged by the way in these documents as
generals who were in many of whom favor
of neutralization of pro gawler
sympathies the goal at that time was
called
the neutralization of Southeast Asia and
in fact what comes out of the documents
is that any talk of neutralism was
regarded as as treason treason by
Vietnamese against American interests
often when they say the situation is
very bad they mean as a danger
concentration things realized
neutralized now this you know that what
I say here is just absolute speculation
and I you know and it's just admit may
not be true but it is known from other
sources not from the documents that
general Ming it was very close to the
French and the French at that time both
in Laos and in Cambodia and in South
Vietnam were still playing some sort of
role and obscure role it's very hard to
say what it was now it's not totally out
of the question that that Washington had
to act in order to prevent the big Ming
government which at that time was trying
to consolidate itself knew how bad the
situation was where there were lots of
rumors that they were in contact with
the North Vietnamese and and to achieve
some sort of negotiated solution that
Washington may have had to act
decisively let us say this is my
speculation you know but that their
their grants were things might have been
so active a to prevent effect accompli
namely some kind of de facto
neutralization in South Vietnam that
could explain the urgency with which
John McCone the head of the CIA the man
excluded of the Honolulu conference
lodge himself a flew back from Saigon
Rusk McNamara all the big bigwigs of the
government rushed in to see Johnson on
the day of the Kennedy funeral I I think
in a sense bronze this is more than
speculation because some of the
documents do go into this and what one
has in the period November in December
of 63 are the two different perceptions
of they're merging Washington's fear not
only of the collapsing situation in
Vietnam itself and what's going on the
rural areas but in the capital and there
you had their own fears of
neutralization and that comes out quite
clearly in a document but from the other
side is I think the perception of the
people in the post coup period in in the
South Vietnamese military elite this
time which is the beginning of jockeying
for positions in a post-war Vietnam it
was not expected at this time
I think of this kind of massive
commitment you have all through the
documents the decisions about bombings
are related to do they build up the
Saigon
from the American side not from the
Saigon side itself they're all the
American analyses of what's necessary to
strengthen those forces in the Saigon
elite that will withstand against
neutralization or coalition governments
but what you have it seems to me in this
period is an immense fluidity in the
Saigon leadership in which they
themselves are thinking in terms of the
end of the war or at least an end of a
period of insurgency where they're going
to lose and they begin to scramble for
positions and the other urgency is
because the Washington is convinced this
may well happen I mean it's written
right there the documents that we know
we've lost and unless the current is
really reversed these forces that are
indigenous to Vietnam will emerge
triumphant I just ask one question
what's happening from the assassination
and TM to the assassination of Kennedy
what's going on and that period both
within Vietnam in policy debate see
that's where there's a gap zero the
absolute zero gap in all the documents
in today's account the New York Times
are just Retton very very quickly that
Hedrick Smith sort of ends at the GM
assassination and the documents have
lodges last conversation Museum by phone
and then NSC 273 four days after what's
an absolute zero up till now the
Christian Science Monitor had some
namby-pamby pieces on that period which
which said nothing absolutely nothing so
I wasn't I wasn't in SEC 273 why wasn't
that enough ember 15 it's quite
conceivable to me that some of the
people who compiled the Pentagon Papers
did not have access to a lot of the
intelligence covert operations that were
being worked on at this period I mean
which is the very crucial period for the
undercover work there's no reason to
believe that this necessarily went
through the Pentagon bureaucracy louvers
conference documents must have been in
the Pentagon because that would we have
documents of the June 64 Honolulu
conference why not November 26 the point
is the way this was discussed is that
there was a real crisis brewing within
Saigon right after diem SAS nation and
it was jockeying for power a lot of
sense of you know there's gonna be a
neutralization it doesn't seem to me
from what we we've said so far that the
situation November 26 was any more any
less or more critic
then November 15th and why is it not
until after the Kennedy assassination
all of a sudden this meeting is cool
with such urgency well if the situation
was so critical with in Vietnam itself
prior to that I'd like to be blunt about
it I think that a group of people met in
Honolulu on November 20th the Wednesday
and decided that things were essentially
alright and the the Council on Foreign
Relations history for that year says
that they proceeded quietly to implement
plans for withdrawal and then the
following Sunday two days after the
assassination the same people met again
in Washington knowing the same facts
dealing with the same reports and
somehow the the balance of power had
shifted within that group of people I
think that's what the situation was no
new input of information at all that's
with with this shift in the balance of
power is the road to Tonkin now fully
paved is that is this what does it or no
I think now we we have to let's just
focus on one period we have to sink it
into China I think and not just a
Vietnam we have to remember that all
along you have covert operations in Laos
you have CIA forward operations with
Mayo tribesmen radio right up against
the border of North Vietnam and those
become very important because there is a
64 is an election year it becomes I
think apparent that Johnson although
he'll authorize all kinds of contingency
studies is not going to move quickly in
that election year and I was very
interested to see the treatment of Laos
in these Pentagon Papers because here is
an instance where both the documents and
the narrative written three years later
talk is if there had been a leisurely
period of planning followed by crisis
decision-making in response to what they
call a patently offensive in the planned
Asia or in May of 1964 those of us who
have studied that period feel and read
not only our own studies but objective
books like there were Dennis Warner who
was quite a Hulk in some ways or Hugh
toy who's perhaps the most I think he's
suspected of being a British
intelligence agent any case written a
very good book on Laos for I think it's
Oxford University Press and he says that
what happened on the pen days are in May
64 was not primarily a
allow offensive at all it was a response
by the other side to a right-wing coup
which had taken place in in vientiane
among our side the virtual scrapping of
the tripartite government the
replacement of it by a forced coalition
between the so-called neutralist forces
and the right-wing forces of general
cumino Sivan and that what happened on
the plan de chartres was a great many of
these neutralist forces refused to go
under the command of general cumino
Sivan and and objected and the patent
Lao quite understandably came to their
defense so what we had here was a a
rightly there's talk in these papers of
a strategy of provocation and here is a
very good example of it there is a
political change which is covert which
is not noticed by the American people in
fact there were a lot of false stories
put out that nothing had changed in
vientiane which was utterly untrue and
then there is an ultimatum to the
neutralist troops to come in under the
right-wing forces the result is a
renewed offensive a renewal of
hostilities in the planned asia which
the americans then immediately use as an
excuse for a stepping up of t-28 prop
plane attacks on patent law positions
and the bringing in the moving up this
is this is not in the papers but it's
very important moving up of aircraft
carriers into the Tonkin Gulf from which
Jets take over for daily overflights of
Laos which very rapidly become daily
bombings of Laos and which really there
set the precedent for the bombing of
North Vietnam I just I think what Peter
just for the benefit of our listeners
that that period may 1964 is very very
critical period because that's an effect
when the bombing of North Vietnam and
Laos began the American bombing and the
in fact the impaired Aviation Week and
space technology of that
June June 22nd 1964 speaks of the first
u.s. offensive actions carried out the
United States since the Korean War and
these were American jets taking off from
Clark Field in the Philippines to bomb
targets in Laos the actual beginning was
through t-28s manned allegedly a manned
by Thai pilots allegedly
but according to the documents under
American command that's one of the
things there's a reference to Air
America pilots there too in other word
covert CIA pilots flying ostensibly for
the Royal a ocean that's right
essentially for the royal a Ocean Air
Force but that period and more exactly
around May 17th 1964 was the beginning
of the air war now what Peter was saying
that in this in in these the the the the
so-called great crisis was called the
fall of Totten tha th om which is aspect
not much bigger than this room anyway
you know and then what Peter describes
what actually occurred the interesting
thing though is that in the documents
the Pentagon analysts take that crisis
at face value they speak of a PLO
offensive and the pdj and the plunder
Jean as if this was a in other words
that that they take at face value what
is it you know at the very best of
fabrication and at the worst you know
probably something else you know but the
very best to fabrication by the so
called layer allowed the fence Ministry
of something sort but these guys if they
do that with Tonkin to and perhaps all
those can speak better on it could I
just tie it up I mean to me the the most
important single fact that has emerged
so far from these documents is one which
many people might have missed and that
is at the time of the first Tonkin Gulf
incident on August the 2nd 1964 the
North Vietnamese protested that their
land on the ocean border had just been
bombed for the first time by some of
these t28 planes with Air America and
Thai and Lao pilots which were bombing
Laos and McNamara denied this all kinds
of people denied it at the time but we
now find a document in the State
Department of November 1964 which
concludes that these attacks on North
Vietnam territory for the first time on
August the first and second probably
took place and I must say I find that
adjective adverb probably as fascinating
as the concession that it did without
more degrees as Marshall greens memory
and the State Department hadn't been
able to find out for sure whether they
had taken place or not the following
year 1965 the Department of Defense
prepared a top top top secret it's
classic
was higher than top-secret analysis of
what happened in Tonkin only 40 copies
of that report were ever prepared and it
was always talked about mysteriously in
the Fulbright Committee as the secret
document that had the real truth about
the Tonkin Gulf incidents but we now
know that the t28 affair was unknown to
the authors of that special study so
that's just one instance in which covert
operations can give a wholly different
picture to what was really happening and
turn apparent aggression from the other
side into sight into a quite different
kind of retaliation and we have to deal
with the extraordinary coincidence of
the first bombing of North Vietnam by
t28 on August the 1st and 2nd with the
34 a marine operations which golden says
were the first 34 a marine operations
against North Vietnam on July 30th and
August the third with the further
coincidence of the first DeSoto patrol
to go in in the context of such covert
operations the first Destroyer patrol of
any kind in five months and we're asked
to believe that all of this was really
happening just as the sort of circuitous
and fortuitous workings of history of
course 34a and the DeSoto patrols were
known by the defense department at the
time and those come out as being part of
the knowledge mcnamara had when he was
making all the announcements in public
that of course we knew nothing about
what was going on there had no role in
it ourselves nobody see mcnamara has
said twice he said in 64 he did not know
of the July 30th marine operation at the
time he authorized the August 2nd
decisions and he said in 1968 he did not
know of the of the August 3rd 34 a
marine operation at the time of the key
decision to bomb North Vietnam I
wouldn't put too much stress on that he
it may well be he didn't know because he
didn't want to know
Johnson was saying don't tell me what's
going on McNamara
my guess is also was saying don't tell
me what is going on but that that's
that's a hell of a way to run a railroad
true but there were in some of the
documents statements about those raids
by McNamara subordinates in memorandum
in which McNamara then denied them in
the secret testimony before the Foreign
Affairs Committee
and Rusk himself when he testified
before the same series of secret
committees was far more ambivalent than
McNamee who gave a flat no it's the same
that these were going up and Russ said
it's possible but of course the
distinction being it's possible because
the South Vietnamese are doing it and
since it's their operation we're not
involved what comes very clearly out of
the documents it's an extent to which we
not only knew what the operation train
were involved training and protecting
them right so it was an essentially an
American operation are these kinds of
operations and consequences of the shift
in the balance of power in Washington
that can be discerned in in late
November 1963 or is there something
changing in the situation internally
within Indochina specifically South
Vietnam well or in Washington I think
that they were too directly the
consequence to change in the balance of
power around the time of the
assassination if you look at the
documents right in the very first day
Sunday in the June the 13th you see that
in January 2nd
Colonel Krulak issue proposed plans for
these 34a ops to the Joint Chiefs of
Staff
now the covert operations before then
had been under CIA control and in CIA
was carrying out assassination and
sabotage and terror and so on but in in
early January 2nd Krulak proposed to the
JCS in fact that they take over those
operations and they did and Krulak was
put in charge and shortly afterward in
February he was purged or fired and an
Air Force general was put in in other
words that the Air Force was in charge
of the 34a ops according to the
documents from February 1964 and from
that you can sort of easily sort of see
that some some interest in using bombing
they always talked the bombing by gvn by
South Vietnamese forces now my what I
said what emerge from the documents
others from other other evidence too is
that that the the the military took a
direct hand in the kind of operations
the 34 a ops that led and there were two
kinds of operations that were involved
one were the operations against North
Vietnam and the other what they call the
Cambodia Laotian border control
operations that's a operation
essentially to interdict the Ho Chi Minh
Trail and take out sanctuaries and
Cambodia variety of other things
those were the two things now you find
interesting this gets back to McNamara
McNamara goes back to South Vietnam in
March 1964 and he stops in Honolulu to
talk to the sink pack people then when
he comes back he issues a series of
twelve recommendations to the National
Security Council to be adopted not it
doesn't say so explicitly but the
implication is that this is a scenario
sort of going from one to twelve first
you do one then you do two and then
three and four until you get to 12 and
number 12 that's all the documents
number twelve is the implementation of
preparations for border Laotian
Cambodian border control operations and
preparations for a Roma Bardon of North
Vietnam I mean the covert operation has
been going on anyway lo and behold what
happens NSC when it meets the following
day adopts another directive NSC 288
which adopts recommendation number 12
it's right there in the documents number
12 is immediately adopted in other words
what McNamara envisage as the last of
that scenario now the picture of
McNamara that comes out is I mean it's a
complicated I don't see him as a tragic
figure I don't see any of these people
as tragic figures but it's the man who
opens the door a little by little and
the heavies just crush right through
yeah I mean and well either they feel I
can control it or you know they're there
they're fantastic intelligence will do
it but once the door is open one
millimeter you know they come crashing
through and and my feeling is that that
I mean you know certainly the seat that
there's a whole CIA story that doesn't
come out because it's Peter so there's
no CIA documents in this you know but
there certainly are military documents
and they show you know as I say a
military crashing straight through and
by March of 1964 the central decisions
had been made that led irrevocably I
mean to Tonkin and then beyond that to
the to the wider war one of their I
would say definitely it was a change not
of what what anything that happened in
South Vietnam or any any chain except
maybe you know the possibility that it
might finally fall in the Vietnamese
make peace among themselves I mean that
that's a possible change but clearly the
new opportunities provided by the fact
that a president was in power who was an
outspoken admirer of the military
tough text and then had always been a
hardliner in Vietnam one of the things
that has come through in my reading of
the documents and this has been
primarily that the times of publications
is confidence on the part of all
American officials whether they're
military or civilian in their plan a
confidence that really borders on and in
many cases becomes real arrogance that
their plan will be successful in spite
of the fact that each plan that's tried
is unsuccessful that they and they have
this information that the information
may not get out to the American public
but it's known to the people in in
policy planning positions and my
question is what is the continuing
source of an American commitment that
that becomes remus eyes dwith johnson
becoming president and american
commitment to fighting the war in
vietnam to continuing to fight this were
not to withdrawing when there is a
perception at least on the part of some
people that withdrawal is a feasible
alternative sometime in 1963 and perhaps
the policy that should be taken funds
you mentioned before we began that
there's very little mention of China in
the documents themselves is this
something that comes comes to bear here
well it gets to the omissions I mean all
if you just go back and look at the time
Newsweek and so on they were saying
we're talking about Chinese expansionism
but saying that will show the Chinese
were not a paper tiger that was from
1964 Americans and South Vietnamese
saying it you know will show the Chinese
were not a paper tiger there had there
been discussions on China not just in
the State Department but in the JCS the
you know the the word China probably
appears a half-dozen or I mean a couple
of dozen times in the whole documents
but there's not one document nor
anything in the analysis that that
suggests so the only thing that's come
out by the way it was what what senator
gravel was reading Dean Rusk saying that
if the Chinese come in will use tactical
nukes against them that and that the
Chinese were told the Chinese must have
been told an admiral felt said that too
in the Honolulu Conference of 64 not 63
but 64
Admiral felt was called the saying the
Chinese coming will use tactical nukes
against them so there's a that's that
whole area of omission well there's an
interesting so I'm not sure when their
commitments me but I get the sense
there's more of a commitment at least in
terms of the decade of the sixties in
that sixty four period to actually
trying to to destroy North Vietnam as to
subvert it to destroy the existence of
communism in North Vietnam some sense
that's possible in 64 I mean obviously
it need to hope for that all along but
more of a sense of that and then there's
this very interesting one-sentence thing
where they say well the actual attempt
at at massive attack on North Vietnam is
contingent at this point of on the
sino-soviet dispute which may erupted
into a war and it's in 64 they're
they're thinking that this is if there's
gonna be this war which will give them
in a chance they want to have it they
want to go up to North Vietnam after the
war starts rather than before it
obviously I assume that's I think that
they tax right now before that will
bring unity between the Russians and
Chinese but if they let the Russians the
Chinese get at each other's throats and
then attacking with Fiat right they can
keep the document and then go after it
that kind of analysis of realpolitik if
that is what they indeed we're thinking
in the white house and the bureaucracy
is really reaching an asinine level but
there's a sense in which in these
documents one doesn't gain any
realpolitik think it's a striking
absence I mean whether we're not being
shown considerations of Chinese policy
whether we're we're not being concerned
with great power politics or whether
these people were basically convinced in
certain elemental assumptions it's
striking in a way that they say in
private what they say in public about
some of the concepts of domino theory or
whether it's the slant we're getting
through the documents themselves because
we're dealing with pentagon documents in
which I think the fundamental criteria
that is evolved is does it work and the
workability framework is not one which
leads you to examine assumptions
it doesn't make you consider certain
types of great power strategy except as
it enters into particular questions and
so when you don't get any feeling for
basic policy being reassessed at moments
all George ball can say is but it
doesn't work I mean may
destroying Vietnam but you know that's
not important it's whether it works or
not and and that kind of framework that
kind of bureaucratic mentality is one
when as France is mentioning you open
the door a little bit from the civilian
leadership to a military it's a logical
point the don't move in and I think it's
the civilian leaders in this point who
are directly responsible and in terms of
Lisbon let me let me out any in terms of
of that of that that kind of realpolitik
thinking is is when you read in those
documents what they're saying about
North Vietnam
now here not only their misperception I
think it's an incredible arrogant
assumptions about what the North
Vietnamese how committed they were but
the comments on covert operations
against the North seemed to be done
without any clear conception at all
about what would mean if the North was
weakened on the one hand you have
discussions about you know it would just
you know we know that they're
independent of the Chinese and on the
other hand a weakened North Vietnam
there's no conclusions drawn from that
in terms of American actions in this
area it's they really have all these
great liberals are not that different
from Goldwater
he says openly let's turn them into a
mud puddle but you're absolutely right
Jim they stay that the great liberals
the McNamara's the McNaughton's it's the
same thing you know there's no sense of
once you've weakened North Vietnam what
do you do then they've mucked around on
that whole issue incredibly I mean at
one point they're you know claiming
we're in Vietnam to prevent Communist
Chinese expansion and then like just in
terms of the Laos invasion they said
well you know the Chinese are not
interested in expanding so there's no
real risk that by doing this will
provoke a war with China so you know
we're not crazy we're not you know China
shouldn't worry you know and you know
and we know that they aren't really
interested in expanding them and they
played both ways all the time with I
think the same kind of knowledge that
they know nothing's gonna happen with
the Chinese in a sense but they have no
sense of a scenario for what what
they're gonna do is one question I we
are running short on time what makes
these policies desirable seriously what
given the intelligence reports that they
were given it couldn't be the fact that
each Intelligence Estimate of every
proposed
policy said this isn't going to work
people went ahead with those policies
and in fact they didn't work you know in
fact I has a long list of answers to
that question but that one what but one
kind of question answer which doesn't
appear from the Pentagon Papers would be
that then the whole aerospace industry
was in a very bad shape at the end of 63
64 I won't go into details now but it's
well documented from Brookings
Institution studies and so on at that
time the stock market perfected it and
it's very interesting that as the Air
Force starts to push for bombing in
these secret meetings of the National
Security Council in early 64 which is
long in advance of the Tonkin Gulf
incidents you see the Department of
Defense going to a whole new series of
decisions to procure the kind of
aircraft which you would use in a
limited conventional war if you had such
a limited conventional war in fact the
the month of February 1964 is when this
debate was came to a kind of head in in
Washington is also the largest month for
new contracts in aircraft procurement
for at least 18 months I believe and all
this was of course not publicized in any
spectacular way at all well also I do to
just expand the list a bit I mean there
was a kind of realpolitik going on I
think which never shows in the documents
for the period 64 and that is the the
the kind of misguided sense of loyalty
that we have to help the president get
reelected and actually one of the things
that was happening then was that the
president in the sense was holding back
a series of forces for escalation which
were not simply coming up from inside
the bureaucracy but which were being
orchestrated in a very grand way by the
military-industrial lobby outside the
country particularly through the
Republican Party and there's a tendency
now to remember this in terms of Barry
Goldwater who was a bit of a comic
figure and so we perhaps don't take it
very seriously but press we should
remember that the man perhaps who more
than any other single figure played the
role of elder statesman and said it's
very important to unleash the South
Vietnamese and let the war be carried in
North Vietnam was Richard Nixon who went
off to Asia spent 24 days in Asia in the
key period of
in April one would like to know what
Asian political figures he spoke to that
time it he called it a private trip but
he was accompanied by 20 News men and he
made a political speech in every country
he came to came back and said we we have
to carry the war north and I think a lot
of the realpolitik for the team was how
are we going to help the president
through the 1964 election and then in
1965 one can really attack the
bureaucrats themselves because they had
four years of freedom and one sees this
kind of so so-called tough mindedness of
style which concedes a sort of basic
inanity just empty headedness when it
comes to content you know in regard to
that and certainly the next program we
can explore it more carefully Neil
Sheehan oh I'll reiterate I think has
done quite a good analytical job in
these documents in speaking about earth
you know the the aims of the United
States and South Vietnam makes a comment
again in the very first article where he
says at the begin the beginning in the
Eisenhower period that the aim was to
keep a non-communist South Vietnam or
keep communism from spreading but that
later under the Kennedy and Johnson
regimes that it turned into a policy of
you know the United States could not be
defeated or had the show it could defeat
counter insurgency McNaughton John
McNaughton says something rather similar
but Norton also removes kind of a
slightly comic figure although he died
in an air crash later he tries to he
really tries to make like Iran or a
military guy talks a very hard-headed
way and on and it's to my mind rather
revolting to see all these civilians
making like military and there are a lot
of academics Pro Vietnam academics who
went off to Vietnam and put on shoulder
holsters and uniforms and and sort of
made like I mean Ellsberg himself of
course it was shown in the newspaper
anyway but McNaughton says in that
document that 70 percent of the aims the
United States related to not being
defeated 20 percent that we're keeping
South Vietnam out of calm in his hands
and 10 percent out of helping the South
Vietnamese that's how he broke it down
now that's I think a very interesting
shift and it doesn't relate to what
Peter was saying the Eisenhower
period you know and it's justification
that we can't let these raw materials
fall into enemy hands that that's well
known has been explored you know by left
and radical scholars but the shift I
think is very important now in the
spring of 1964 if someone were reading
the newspapers or the Washington
congressional quarterly or anything else
one of the most violent arguments going
on at that time was between McNamara and
Curtis LeMay chief of staff of the Air
Force over the whole use of man bombers
and McNamara's ideas with a get rid of
man bombers and set up a defense posture
based entirely on missiles and and
conventional forces and to fight
brushfire Wars and Maxwell Taylor had
very much the same idea and Maxwell
Taylor not only played a major role in
Vietnam but I made a major role in
military thinking the United States ever
since the late 1950s so that here you
take Curtis LeMay the man who was he
puts in his own terms fried the cities
of Japan in world war ii who loved
planes rather primitive character but
all the other Air Force types that same
way Nathan twining the walls it they
love planes they love pilots you know
that's that's their life their bread and
butter how could they envisage by the
way McNamara visit phasing out the
Strategic Air Command by 1970 there
would be no sac by 1970 he stated that
publicly many times how can you have an
Air Force without man planes you know
this was inconceivable also you have to
remember at that time the test ban
treaty had been signed that there was
talk about cutting down a defense
spending in fact there was a recession
Peter and I were talking about in 1964
and the aerospace industry in the state
the potential of a five-year state
planned procurement program was coming
to an end and no one saw what was going
to come and there was rising
unemployment just as there is now now I
I think this is inseparable these these
conflicts
you know inseparable for what are in
Vietnam I mean Mac I don't excuse
McNamara this because the McNamara in
the Liberals they were playing with
their covert war and there their
finagling here and their finagling there
knows they were playing with matches
little realizing they were playing next
to a gasoline tank with the gasoline
running out but the military who clearly
was not anxious to get involved in in
South Vietnam never fight another war in
the Asian mainland never find another
land war in the Asian mainland that was
there without nuclear wave without
nuclear weapons that's right but they
were they were not tremendously eager to
get involved but suddenly around this
period
they're you know very very eager
especially after the test ban treaty I
mean the whole test ban treaty signing
so you have to imagine this this this
this and this viciousness in washing of
the time it comes out it's not you know
just have to read the arguments between
LeMay and McNamara you know sort of
going on so that what what you would you
end up with I think into my mind is the
most horrible crime you know that could
emerge from this whole thing I mean it
emerges even and the way one reads how
general Taylor dealt with the South
Vietnamese generals that we have not
meant nothing to them
see even the Eisenhower regime at least
wanted their raw materials but but these
people were using the you know that
these people of course they didn't want
Vietnam to become communist but they're
essentially using Vietnam one to show
the counterinsurgency could work to to
show that they could be communist three
that airpower would work that they in
effect were willing and that included
the Liberals and the nd the military
troglodytes they were willing to amuse a
people to fight a proxy war against
China a people whom we had nothing but
contempt and disdain they say is evident
even in the documents to fight at their
own bureaucratic struggles that I think
is the the the most ghastly crime of
this of the war that comes out in the
documents at this point I'm gonna have
to call at least a temporary halt
I think the basis has been laid very
excellently for our next program a
discussion about those conflicts and
about how they've continued and what
part the release of the Pentagon Papers
themselves play in the continuing
conflicts of interest that determine
what goes on in Washington gentlemen
thank you all very much
this program was produced by KPFA
Pacifica Radio for Northern California
and distributed by Pacifica program
service in Berkeley all rights are
reserved
this program is the second discussion
among a group of people about the
Pentagon Papers the material revealed in
that well actually not all the material
it was revealed in those 40 volumes but
at least that which has been published
by the New York Times Washington Post
and now a number of other papers around
the United States excerpts interpretive
articles and to some extent particularly
in the times segments of memoranda
internal government documents that
revealed things that a lot of people had
suspected for some time but provided
some of the first real hard evidence to
substantiate those opinions the people
who are going to be participating in
this discussion around the table are
Peter Dale Scott Jim Peck
Franz Sherman Rick Kusaka Marty Gillan
and John Livingston we had a discussion
before we came into the studio talking
about the 25-year period which is of
American policy making that is
documented to some extent in the
Pentagon Papers I think last week we
talked at a number of points about the
limitations of these documents as it's
coming out of the Defense Department as
they're being certain striking emissions
even and and we don't know if those are
emissions in the papers themselves or
emissions and what various newspapers
have chosen to publish but there is a
very clear pattern one that we've all
known about Franz you and and Peter and
reg selnick wrote a book about it called
the politics of escalation which I think
serves as a convenient conceptual
orientation towards what happened a
repeatedly escalated American commitment
and American involvement in the politics
and development of Southeast Asia and I
think that in this program one way of
starting in and looking at that politics
of escalation is to examine
threads of continuity and threads of
discontinuity moments of discontinuity
over that 25-year period there were
different administrations as the New
York Times and the papers have pointed
out there were two Democratic presidents
two Republican presidents who have been
in office during this period but but
really are the continuities the most
important thing is this a point that
should be focused on at this point I
don't know who would like to speak to
that first Franz well I think the the
papers have emphasized the continuities
in fact they've tended to gloss over
some of the differences that we dealt
with last time particularly what
happened in the period immediately
following Kennedy's assassination in
1964 on the other hand I do think
there's a I mean one has to look at both
things but the continuity serve are very
important and in particular the sense
that one has even more strongly in one
had in the past of the single-minded
determination since 1954 perhaps since
1950 I'm the part of all the leaders of
the United States civilian military and
covert to fight communism in Southeast
Asia with limits at certain times
imposed by the real situation or posed
by this cautiousness because of the
dangers that were involved but reading
those documents from 1955 when
Eisenhower authorized covert operations
when General Lansdale went up to Colonel
Ames Neil went up to Hanoi to bomb power
stations and poison wells 1958 when
General Eisenhower the National Security
Council during the Eisenhower
administration authorized that a
document calling for the unification of
Vietnam under an anti communist
government in time that Kennedy
escalated in 61 and Johnson escalated in
64 that the sense one has of a of a
locomotive moving irrevocably ahead on
the tracks halting occasionally that
places where the cows go across the
tracks or to pick up
and sometimes the engineer wants to
drink of water but the sense of that
locomotive moving on with great power
and determination and that it's only
been within the last a few weeks I
suppose a few months that there's any
sign that this locomotive may be halting
or coming to a halt
Jim it strikes in a sense it strikes me
about the time series now there may have
been reasons why to make the newspaper
itself decided on the order but part of
the way they've come out has been to
make it even more difficult to put it
together in terms of an overarching
pattern there isn't a chronological
sequence to the documents they jump back
and forth and I thought in one sense the
most revealing section for me was the
section on the 50s in the Geneva
Conference and what emerges out of this
I think very much confirms what Francis
said that there was indeed an
overarching basic commitment that
emerges out of the late 40s and early
50s under the Democrats and it's as
though though we don't see the mechanics
of it that the right-wing ideology in
Asia emerged dominant by the time of the
Korean War and it was never to be
challenged in any of these documents now
there were different emphases of emerge
some people will stress national
prestige once the military is committed
but the basic assumptions undergirding
American policy the anti-communist
thrust was there and went in one sense I
feel about a flow over this 25-year
period is it in 1950 there was that
period in which the right one
ideologically but the actual military
presence of the United States is not
that powerful in Asia yet Korea marks
one involvement but still American power
was primarily European centered and what
one sees in the 50s and in the early 60s
is a constant struggle among various
groups all of within this ideology but
all moving towards a greater American
buildup there would be debates over
traditional military versus covert
forces but there's there's a momentum
here which seems to me almost to be
equated with the amount of American
it was actually available to move in the
Southeast Asia and the overarching
framework ideological framework was set
by the at Estonian Democrats and very
striking I thought 52 statement they had
on how to deal with communism and Asia
what's the source of this though is is
the loss of China the the most important
source of the similarity there's
maintenance of certain assumptions among
and after all this debate insofar as
there is any kind of debate is going on
you know only above a certain level it's
going on among people in positions of
power I don't think that there's any
question about that but how important is
is China in in setting these assumptions
up or how important there are other
things in relation to that I think one
can look both to the geographic reasons
and also the the functional or
structural reasons for this commitment
it's the same kind of advisors I think
who really have both of these interests
in mind so far as the as far as the
geographic interest is concerned I think
one conceived from the documents even in
1948-49 before China had had finally
fallen that if China was going to fall
then there had to be an alter an
alternative US base somewhere on the far
side of the Pacific on the mainland and
the obvious choice here was Thailand and
so you you have discussions about taking
Thailand a new Bastion and of course for
the Thais to be interested in playing
that role they they wished certain kinds
of commitments from the United States
not only in Thailand itself but also in
Laos which is part it was then part of
Indochina and it's very striking I think
that the u.s. in interest in Indochina
becomes very marked with the fall of
China and conversely that there is a
revival of Chiang kai-shek's fortunes
under the Republicans with the with the
1954 Geneva agreement people like Joe
Allsop who had more that's broken with
Chiang kai-shek suddenly become very
outspoken advocates of doing everything
for Chiang kai-shek including putting
him back on the mainland when for a
brief period it looks as if the
Geneva agreements might work in the
United States might be pushed out of
into China as for the I don't to speak
to long but they're the the people who
have been interested in foreign policy
have also been interested in a kind of
balanced defense posture towards the
rest of the world and hereto Indochina
has been very important always talked
about preparing for limited war and
developing ground forces was in response
to the crisis of 1954 when the Americans
found essentially that they didn't have
the kind of ground forces to supply in
support of the French which they
themselves estimated would be necessary
as for talking about changes array of
administration I just like to point out
that underneath just below the level of
changes of of President and of party
you'll have really a very essential
continuity so that a deputy secretary of
defense under McNamara is Roswell
gilpatrick who is a lawyer for General
Dynamics and now under Nixon you have
David Packard in the same position a
very important position where contracts
are allotted and he is or has been a
director of General Dynamics so I don't
think one should over exaggerate the
importance --is of a change of
administration one of the things that
was talked a lot about when Kennedy was
elected and there was there was an
infusion of new blood of a different
generation of policy makers coming to
Washington does that is that in fact
true with respect to Asian policy I mean
were there with new faces but or did
that really not mean anything that there
may have been new faces in particular
places but that they were still getting
their information guidance from the same
groups the the same interests within the
United States and the new faces that did
come in under Kennedy such as Dean Rusk
known first a great statement in the
early 1950s that China was a Slovak
Manchu ko or general Maxwell Taylor who
has now been exposed as one of the
leading Hawks on those days he was sort
of seen as a very dashing educated
general an exception among the generally
uneducated generals of that period but
it's quite clear now and it would
certainly should have been clear at that
time if one had read the open statements
that Taylor was a real hawk on East East
Asian policy in his book on the
uncertain trumpet in 1959 called for an
effect called the preparation for a
variety of limited Wars to fight
brushfire situations in that part of the
world and one looks at people like Roger
Hillsman forced to agree with Joe Allsop
who the other day attacked Roger
Hillsman is not just as a turncoat but
it's one of the great Hawks deriving
from his OSS experience in Burma during
the war and so on I think what one finds
are that the bright new faces that come
into the Kennedy administration in 1961
at least as far as the Far East a
concern are aggressive hawkish and I
think as Jim Jim Peck said a bit earlier
fully shared that in practice that that
right wing ideology that dominated and
determined American policy in that part
of the world
and that's very clear with Dean Rusk now
there's a sense in a way in which of
many of these people that come in with
Kennedy were very much related to the a
trussoni in-group before I mean the
Bundy is related to Atchison a lot of
the advisers had family links personal
links political links to the developed
over the years and I think part of what
changes in the Kennedy years is first is
the extension of American power into
this region it's so much greater than it
was in the 40s and secondly is the sign
of Soviet dispute and partly out of that
emerges the counterinsurgency momentum
as I think that most of the great
counterinsurgency theorists were those
who saw it as a way living with the
dispute and this was part of the way to
and since rollback
that the Communist momentum in this part
of the world and these two strands come
together with these advisors but the
basic assumptions under which they
operated simplistic domino theories
economic interest etc in some ways
remain strikingly consistent it is
really yes it is true that some of those
so-called new faces in 61 had been in
opposition to Eisenhower's defense and
foreign policies in the last two or
three years of his administration but
that was because Eisenhower at the end
of his epoch was trying to stabilize
defense spending was increasingly
reluctant to defense budgets and it's
really one of the most important events
domestically United States was the the
the mini recession of 1957 and the kind
of private planning which went on in
Wall Street circles the Council on
Foreign Relations in response to that
mini recession those were the the the
people like Roswell gilpatrick again who
trying to kill two birds with one stone
cmon developed ground forces so that
you could fight a limited war which they
found they couldn't do in 54 and also
develop a program for a greatly
increased defense spending both of these
were advocated by the Rockefeller
Brothers fund panel to report in 1957
many of the people who took part in
those discussions under the Nelson
Rockefeller and his and his brother
Lawrence were the same people whom can
be brought into his Democratic
administration in 1961 so that the the
superficial debate conceals the the
people who become the opposition 57 are
the people really who are most
interested in sustaining this momentum
in in in in Asia is it important than to
identify or can one identify any kind of
significant turning points either in a
strategic or a tactical sense at various
points during this 25-year period is is
that something that's worth worth doing
on the basis of at least in part on the
basis of the additional evidence
provided by the
Pentagon Papers well I just don't
suggest a few and perhaps then we can
move on to other points in the
discussion I personally think Kennedy
was thinking of pulling out of Vietnam
and was in contact with the French for
that purpose and that he was doing that
in opposition and probably in secrecy
from all the high officials of his
government Dean Rusk Maxwell Taylor
Robert McNamara probably not from Bobby
Kennedy as as I indicated last time that
this is the most obscure and vague
period and it was quickly quashed
Kennedy's assassination ended that
possibility and Johnson was obsessed
with the fear that South Vietnam could
go neutralist and contrived a coup
against the general in charge big Ming
and was ousted and from late January
1964 the last days of January all the
pieces were in place for revving up the
motors of the locomotive and going full
steam ahead the 34a ops were launched
kind American puppet was in power a pro
war staff was holding the reins in
Washington the military was calling the
shiny merican military was calling the
shots and there was no fear any longer
that General de Gaulle or the French who
still had considerable influence that
far the world could do anything that was
I think a mini turning point which came
to nothing the more important turning
point of course is the turning point of
centering around March 1968 which was a
definite de-escalation as was November
October 1968 we don't know anything
about October 68 the study Peters out
around March 68 March
an a-plus 1668 but those turning points
relate to what is now the real turning
point what seems to be a an approaching
climax in this war so perhaps we might
discuss that in that context but earlier
I I see nothing from 1954 on I seem I
see no except for that period in the
last month or so of Kennedy's life
I see no real turning point a turning
point can i generalize a bit about that
I think most presidents tend to come in
secretly at any rate as hawks and to go
out as doves they have to come in as
they they they come in planning to go
somewhere because they really to finance
an election you have to have the support
of the big defense contractors it's just
no doubt about that but I think
Eisenhower in his last years was not so
much in Asia but generally trying to do
something about defense spending I think
Kennedy certainly was in in that last
period before he's assassinated in
Johnson in 68 I think having tried to
win as a hawk was beginning to see that
it couldn't in today I'm quarreling here
with the the New York Times estimate
because Hendricks Smith in his two
articles that I read tries trying to
suggest that the unlimited commitment
came in 1961 and we've been a sense
coasting from there and and I think it's
just very clear if you see the enormous
debate going on in this country in 1963
in the very powerful lobbying from
spokesmen some of them involved
spokesmen for the oil interests calling
calling for an unlimited commitment in
Vietnam and saying in print that what
was went wrong with our effort in
Vietnam was that up to now it had not
been unlimited and it had to be
unlimited before it would work is
adequate documentation that there there
was that kind of pressure at that time
and I think the first document which
could be called the basis for an
unlimited commitment was NSA M 273 which
was reached two days after the Kennedy
assassination before we get into
discussing the limits the points at
which the limits were proposed and
and it finally said on what had been an
escalating commitment I wonder were
there any challenges and and this would
deal primarily with the period of the
50s challenges to this policy that were
posed from outside the policy-making
elite that had either no significant
impact or no impact whatsoever or where
they're simply no challenges posed even
by people on the outside that's in thing
is the famous case of George ball but I
mean I was wondering primarily though
about the 50s no I think really there
wasn't that what one sees in the 50s in
order to have an effective opposition
from without you have to have some sort
of ideological alternative and what was
striking about the 50s was the extent to
which liberals and the right in this
country could come together on basic
assumptions they could be containment
they could come together on theories of
nation-building they wouldn't share the
arguments for the basic conclusions they
would be their theories about the tallit
arianism would fit together as well and
in the sense the the the liberal
approach in this country which came to
be known as nation-building and
modernization was really the domestic
ideology which disguised the operations
which was unrelentingly harsh and
conservative I mean the the ideology and
sense of nation-building can be
considered liberal but the impact itself
has nothing of this and and yet if
you're going to have an effective
critique I mean one which really
provides an alternative to another to
policy you have to go far beyond this
and there isn't either in the documents
themselves nor in retrospect back on to
that period and a framework for an
alternate what about what about
resistance from within South Vietnam
itself to the policy there I remember
reading something about GM being nervous
about American troops being brought in
the Vietnamese are very nationalists
under rad people certainly the Buddhists
played a role for several years very
important all what about that role why
was that so easily oh that's uh that's
uh not only is young but a premier by
name of quat who in the spring of 1965
after the bombing had started
this is not just evidence things much
evident for the documents from other
things have been published since then
did not want to see a massive number of
Americans coming to South Vietnam so he
was dumped to his dumped the United
States dumped him and put in general key
and fact there is a thread that goes
through the South Vietnamese side all
the way to the sending of American
ground combat troops and marshal Keyes
assumption of power which occur at the
same time more or less that the South
Vietnamese don't want to see all those
foreigners there and variety of reasons
so that they're there and then then the
thing that we've been reading about the
the tendencies toward neutralism that
knew himself president Siam's brother
was in contact with the north vietnamese
in some indication as diem himself may
have been contacted to get amis maybe a
thumb he's always been talking together
and said madam nu has just confirmed
this in a radio broadcast in the last
week something that that has
increasingly struck me partly because of
all the material that has been published
and and all the the thought that is
being given to the to these issues again
is the degree to which America's great
largely technological power gradually
eliminated all the alternatives that
existed other than the two that the
ideology behind the policy always
insisted were the only two that existed
either we go in and resist communism or
communism takes over and that's even
putting it very starkly but that there
is this process of destroying opposition
to any kind of client regime that the
United States has within South Vietnam
and and to changing the faces in the
client regime itself at any point when
they indicate that they want some
independence of action so that the
important question then becomes or the
important issue then becomes the the
only way that limits are in fact set on
this power is within the elite itself
and and they're I think what we should
explore now is the reasons why at
various points in times people did try
to
five cows across the track in front of
the locomotive and and perhaps even more
dramatic things than that but it seems
to me in a sense where we're in entering
in a different period because of the
American defeat it opens up
possibilities for greater limits to be
thrown in the way of the war machine and
there are indications in the past which
I'm sure we'll go into in a minute in
terms of points but another aspect which
I think is going to be increasingly
apparent is that this stress upon
anti-communism
and the way in which it was applied was
also one which for all practical
purposes eliminated the concepts of
allies except those who were subordinate
and it's a striking commentary on the
50s and early 60s that the Europeans and
the Japanese play a strictly subordinate
role they at the best are hindrances and
I mean worst hindrances and the best
allies in the effort but the American
power is so immense in this period that
it can quite literally overlook why the
lesser power would have to do in dealing
with Indochina and also what a power
would have to do who worked in more
traditional balances of power or worked
actually with various allies which the
United States was not prepared to do in
this period I mean the flip side of
isolationism some of common it is a type
of globalism one which isn't willing to
work with other allies or other powers
and I think that's another aspect which
is beginning the shift which is going to
throw back on some of the roadblocks or
the throne in the way of America yet
were there points in the 50s and in the
Truman and Eisenhower administration's
when people within the policy making
positions the policy-making elite we're
thinking about hesitating about limiting
the commitment of American power and
Indochina well one very interesting
thing that does come out of the papers
is that the military itself was very
hesitant at least about intervening 1954
which seems you know a stark contrast to
the kind of view we have of the the
military in the sixties where they're
just you know you have to
held back by the leash that was done
from more and more but it it was very
interesting that I think it was one was
in April May of 1954 in the joint chiefs
of staff told Eisenhower that they
believed and this is a quote that
Indochina with reference to the Far East
as a whole Indochina is devoid of
decisive military objectives and the
allocation of more than token US armed
forces in Indochina would be a serious
diversion of limited US capabilities and
I mean the document seemed to point this
up where there various other points as
well they're very not not washes they
not eager you know to send in troops in
and this probably has a lot to do with
it I'm sure the situation in Korea and
also Europe at the same time but it
seems there's tremendous hesitancy from
from the military for any really massive
type of intervention as as we found in
this in the sixties when was it that
that change was that as early as sixty
one that the military changed their
minds or does that really insist America
what what Marty's been alluding to his
you know it's a very major problem I
mean what lead parent to a situation
where military which had been rather
cautious around 1954 that was cautious
in the late 1940s and even the economy
minded turning into the wild beast
frothing at the mouth in the early 1960s
now there's some evidence of what
happened in the late 1940s that the arm
the the armed forces were cautious in
1948 then while the State Department
officials came in with vast new spending
programs and the Soviet explosion of an
atomic weapon and song and of course
then the China thing in the Korean War
and during the Korean War the military
is ready to undertake the liberation of
China by armed force and is then
restrained only with difficulty then
resumes a cautious posture for the 1950s
considerable part thereof income the
Democrats again the Kennedy types the
Rockefeller Brothers you know shouting
national securities menaced and and so
on and by 1961-62 the military
takes on the form that there is very
familiar from the documents it seems to
be a it's a variation of a metaphor I
suggested last week of the Liberals
opening the door and the heavies rushing
through it's it's the the the kindly
intelligent dog trainers feeding more
and more red meat to their dogs and then
finally making them so hungry and that
they're ready to burst out of their
cages
wait so but that that I think is sort of
roughly the the an end the dog start
devouring the the the master themselves
I have a feeling that if one were to
read the facilities or other classic
military histories want to find similar
things happening I would think there's
some extent that that it's really that
maybe that the Korean War which might
have made the military so hesitant
because what struck me about this the
statement is that's very similar to two
statements I've seen today coming out of
the military where they're in a position
that isn't too different from 1954 where
they've just come out of a really bloody
war which was a stalemate and in this
case was the situation is much worse
than in Korea and they were they were
very reluctant to to to make any other
types of military commitments anywhere
else in the world and I think that it
was very interesting especially about
this this statement 54 from the Joint
Chiefs of Staff is that the militaries
in the similar position now and the
obvious conclusion is 10 years from now
you know they're going to be and just
biting at the leash ready to go off
again okay I think it's a bit misleading
though just to quote that one statement
from 1954 they didn't want to put troops
in there I think Admiral Radford would
have been quite happy to drop an atomic
bomb on the country and some in the Air
Force would have been - it was they
really did object to limited warfare and
that's when you get this opposition that
I was talking about earlier which is in
direct response to the failure in
Indochina and the failure to get the
American position at Geneva it's it's a
precisely generals like general Taylor
who say yes we can develop a capable
capability in conventional warfare and
what you have in the Kennedy
administration is that those those
generals
new kinds of generals are now put into
high position and it's important to
remember that Westmoreland is a is a
Taylor general Italy they're both
paratroopers just our paratroopers have
a big role just as the French
paratroopers made a big role in
Indochina and Algeria and I think one
could develop that you know it's
stopping at a certain point but it's to
remembered also that the early Kennedy
is well he came in on missile gap and
toughness and all the rest of it that
produced money to close the gap and it
also produced money to do you know
limited work their preparedness and hope
that there were two events there was the
Brillion mobilization and there was the
cupid episode each of which I would
guess was at the minimum damaging to the
ego of the military and to the sense of
strength and American power and this
between new money is available the
political prestige that had been staked
on those things and I'm coming into
power behind in this account between and
this all this set of things I can see
both material and a sort of ideological
reason for seizing on the opportunity of
Vietnam to go ahead and go ahead no to
fill that out there was a third crisis
which was perhaps at least as important
which was Laos and we know I mean we had
pretty inadequate documentation as to
what the Joint Chiefs were asked pushing
on Kennedy in those first weeks of his
administration and they were talking
about going in with fifty to sixty
thousand troops but and this is where
the Korean memory comes in only if they
could be backed up with the right to use
nuclear weapons if necessary and you
hear a lot about the never another Korea
Club in the in the forces that doesn't
mean we never want to fight another land
war that means we never want to fight
another land world where we don't have
the opportunity to use nuclear weapons
and I think so far as China was
concerned some kind of concession along
those lines what was given to the
military under the Johnson
administration this site I think it's
very important that we raise the issue
of nuclear weapons again especially now
that the possibility is an escalation
are not as great as they were
seven months ago and some of us in the
Bay Area Institute we're here at this
microphone talking about the possibility
of using nuclear weapons that what's
come out in the documents and in some of
the things that senator gravel is read
is quite clearly that that tactical
nuclear weapons or some variant thereof
did play a role in the hole in the China
situation now Rusk at one point was
quoted by Gravelle and Admiral felt is
is is reported to have said in the
Honolulu Contras of 1964 of June 1964
that if the Chinese intervened we have
to use tactical nuclear weapons Rock
said that clearly so that a kind of
doctrine emerged at that time that if
the Chinese intervened and I've heard it
stretched even to if the North
Vietnamese should intervene massively in
Laos or South Vietnam but in any case if
the Chinese intervene then you've got to
use nuclear weapons that I think became
fixed doctrine in the in the military
now that that threat to use nuclear
weapons I think has to be seen in the
context of what was a rapidly escalating
air war which was being planned and
thought about from the days immediately
after the Kennedy assassination the 34a
ops that that general Krulak proposed in
the second of January 1964 already had
in it implied in it a series of
escalatory steps leading to the bombing
of North Vietnam so the the bombing
plans were laid out at that at that very
early period 34a ops covert operations
were to lead over at mommy
now overt bombing immediately brought
the question of of China and it
certainly brought the question of Russia
in the sense that they were that the
Russian ships came in the - harbor and
the reason for not bombing - was always
those could that it that could hit a
Russian ship Dean Rusk said in one of
his interviews he said well if we if we
had a confrontation with the Russians
they could make trouble for us in East
Germany they have an old woman in 50 men
to cut between these in West Germany but
apparently the the danger of a
confrontation with the Soviet Union was
not so great because of the they taught
that was that operative much much more
serious was a possibility of a
confrontation with China after all Rusk
himself talked about a big
in Chinese overwhelming Asia and George
Murphy and others were talking about if
you don't stop him there they'll come
marching down Market Street Chinese
expansionism that's only been a few
years ago now if if you if you then take
the one hand that the the the escalatory
pattern of the air war leading closer
and closer to China in fact the bombing
was very close to China at several
points then what has come out from these
documents namely an agreement a policy
decision that was made in the
administration name if the Chinese come
in or some one construes that they have
come in who knows how the change could
come in someone makes a decision that
the Chinese are now in North Vietnam
maybe two Chinese counselors take a walk
from the Chinese embassy in Hanoi that's
where an American intelligence officer
reports he heard Chinese on an intercom
as well or you reinterpret work teams
now know as the soldiers right you
reinterpret worked easy North Vietnam as
soldiers now this I think gets back to
the question bill that sort of the
second part of our discussion the
restraints that gradually came in I
think it is true that whereas Johnson
came in to his administration with a
Vietnam War whoop it is also true I
think that from 1965 onward in a very
strange way he exercised the restraining
role that in fact I'd almost be prepared
to argue that the sending of 500 to 600
thousand American ground troops to South
Vietnam was an act of moderation in
other words that that he was he was
operating in the context of seeing an
air war that was moving closer and close
to the China if that confrontation had
occurred then nuclear weapons could be
used and presumably also the bombing
could go on against China and I think
there were men in the United States
government I think Dean Rusk was among
them WW rasta was among them probably a
part of Johnson himself but some of the
scene and some of the CIA people who
actively wanted a war with China for a
variety of reasons I mean one was just
good old roll back and anti-communist
reasons but for more specific reasons
namely to destroy the developing Chinese
nuclear program before it got to the
point that that it could not be
destroyed or the Chinese air defenses
were of such a nature to make an attack
impossible in 1964
attacked by conventional aircraft b-52s
from Thai bases was possible without
serious interference from the Chinese
it's no longer possible now I think her
men were pressing it I think Dean Rusk
was particularly pressing that a man
known for his bitter racial hatred of
the Chinese every statement that he's
made has indicated the most hostile
hostile without limits hostile attitudes
toward China and that Johnson I think
became aware of for variety of reasons
maybe as Peter suggested that every
president comes in as a hawk and then it
becomes a dove or a semi dove or it
begins to get worried about the extent
of these actions and a series of
restraining actions and take place the
most well-known of which are of course
the the targeting the fact that there
were restrictions on the targets that
the Joint Chiefs kept on pressing for a
removal of all limits now the bombing
the Americans carried I was horrible but
still there were a few places that were
not bombed some of the airfields will
not bomb until later
they weren't bombed right away even the
military was pressing for the military
one of the press the rail lines leading
right to China but what are these
reasons and is reality one of them I
mean we talked like we talked last week
about how the intelligence estimates of
proposed policies were consistently that
those policies would not accomplish the
goals that they were designed to
accomplish and yet each of those
policies and maybe not in turn may be
out of turn but but the policy continued
to escalate
I mean how important is reality how
important is is the incredible
resistance that the Vietnamese and other
Indo Chinese people were able to
continue in as a factor in restraint or
are there other sources internal sources
within the policy making it elite itself
and and thus among conflicting American
interests domestically that are more
important here who wouldn't it it would
seem that that the the emergence of
restraining forces within the government
itself was perhaps best signified by the
fact that that to report a study like
this this the Pentagon Papers was made
at a time when you know what the papers
reveal was a emerging split within the
administration over the prosecution of
the war it's a very curious thing that's
something we also all mentioned before
that McNamara comes off so clean in this
report report which he himself you know
had commissioned and I think this would
lead us maybe to to include that you
know there isn't obviously very very
critical intent in and direction in the
whole study of u.s. foreign policy in
Southeast Asia in this Pentagon report
looking kinda said I think one reason
limits emerge and well this this
conflict were talk about it becomes very
visible in 67 when Admiral sharp comes
to the Stennis subcommittee and is
questioned about the possibility of
mining - fire at Harbor or bombing
Haiphong Harbor and that's when we get
this report what had happened then was
that the the the military had reached
the limits which had been laid down in
the game plan we were going to fight a
limited war in Indochina and we were not
interested in fighting with China as
long as they didn't begin it and the
military tried to win within those
limits and they had escalated and
escalated to the point that they were
bursting out of those limits and we were
actually shooting down MiG's over
Chinese territory we were through there
I think between June of 67 and January
of 68 we I may be slightly wrong but it
we hit we bombed and strafed apparently
deliberately in the order of three
Russian ships and I think six Chinese
ships and obviously this war was
beginning to get out of hand I don't
think it's so much that the other people
changed their minds about what they did
want to do but said that they saw that
this like The Sorcerer's Apprentice they
had begun something which was getting
too big to handle in the
to crack down well on top of that of
course the Tet Offensive completely
smashed our sense of a smooth victory a
battle plan that was going along
smoothly and so forth now well that was
part of it but certainly the Ted is the
thing that drove it home and yeah
spurred on the forces at home to
challenge the government and it seems to
me that it's between that that loss in
the field and increasing pressure
especially was McCarthy and so forth
that made it impossible that's what
begins to impose the limits yeah there
was a part of a Mills question before
about why weren't these intelligence
reports listened to and that I think is
interesting that should have been a
limit especially if you hear these
people talk about how they make
decisions and so forth one of the things
that struck me most about these papers
is the use of incredibly old-fashioned
moral language at every key turn in the
argument that is you don't listen to
essentially you don't listen to the
intelligence because it means weakness
all the intelligence on their harbingers
of weakness and peaceful enemity and all
the rest of it that's the strong man
persevered and it's almost as other
dread the itching there's strong man
persevered and just fights his way
through and so forth except that one day
they woke up and there were people
inside of the embassy what one has a
feeling by the way in reading these that
parts of the Pentagon intelligence
system that the Defense Intelligence
Agency and the CIA must have come
together for a period of time in terms
of their assessments because the the
relationship between the CIA analysts
who documents are referred to and the
Pentagon is so close you don't see
divergencies and attitudes particularly
which would seem to indicate this is an
alliance which had been formed I think
also you know when one talks about that
that those limits it's it's important
realizing something like intelligence
that I'm convinced that when one looks
back intelligence is almost always
ignored with one goes back into the 40s
and looks at the information coming out
of China to decision makers it was very
accurate on the whole and in the reason
decisions were made in Washington as
they were was not based upon the field
of reporting it was quite accurate on
John
the Communists and it's almost to the
extent that intelligence follows it
doesn't proceed decision-making it
justifies it doesn't critique and
somebody can be used as an instrument in
the way I I just like to develop that a
bit further I I I think that every
bureaucratic point of view was able to
call upon its kind of intelligence to
justify what it was arguing and in fact
I've been researching this what I call
intelligence battles which precede key
operational decisions many of them so
called crisis decisions well good at the
best example of this perhaps would be
the Cambodian invasion which is
technically out of art period which was
preceded by some intelligence sources
not only reporting but leaking their
reports to the New York Times that the
headquarters for the for the NLF
operation in Vietnam was not in Cambodia
being competed by other intelligence
authorities clearly in this case army
saying yes there there is a cause ban a
headquarters in Cambodia with an
elaborate description of it made housing
5,000 men being made in concrete being
an echo of the Pentagon and underground
that kind of debate precedes the
decision and although we have had in the
Pentagon Papers a series of dovish
intelligence reports there were I am
sure for for most of those reports there
were at the same time other intelligence
reports which talked about the the the
the step up in North Vietnamese
infiltration or whatever it might be to
justify going one step up in this Peter
I'd like to underline what Peter is
saying because I think it that every
bureaucracy or every figure in the
bureaucratic figure all the figures in
the bureaucratic conflicts have their
own intelligence so that everybody has
his own intelligence estimates that
didn't ak' what he wants to know I think
it might be well to point out to our
listeners that that also applies very
much to the role of academic advisors to
the government that I've heard a lot of
people say well the government only had
better advisors from universities you
know what things would have been so bad
and from my own very limited experience
but from certain amount of observation a
feeling that most of these academic
advisors are a part of a stable of a
particular bureaucracy
so that the right-wing bureaucracies
have their right-wing acting's and the
Liberals have theirs and so they pride
themselves on their Chinese
understanding you tell them what you
want a speech I know and a good man is a
manual you can count on to deliver what
you want from now I think but what the
papers do show is that that the the
intelligence is immaterial I mean it the
intelligence is the instrument or
portions of the intelligence are the
instruments of a particular bureaucracy
and the subject that Peter Scott has
worked on a great deal of tonkin I won't
speak for him but but he's working on a
great deal at the that the key elements
in there were intelligence intercepts
that were probably manufactured by
intelligence agencies to justify a
certain policy but the the papers do
show that the the where the limitation
set in is when the ruling class in the
United States the people who who
exercise great influence great wealth
begin to make themselves felt I think
the publication by the New York Times a
newspaper that that is a ruling class
newspaper that when when that the the
publication by the New York Times of
these documents I think must be seen as
an intervention on the part of the class
of people in northeastern business
interests of the corporate ruling class
into the processes that are being
carried out badly by their managers who
were who came into power either by their
appointment and manipulation or election
whatever the case may be
now when one looks at the document sees
that ruling class intervention occurred
at an earlier period for example in
March 1968 at the key meetings of March
18th
and March 25th were meetings with Clark
Clifford Dean Acheson and George ball
and and other people came down McGeorge
Bundy response a variety of people came
down and a number of other corporate
executives I remember reading it at the
time who came down to Washington to give
Johnson their advice now they get going
on the Washington all the time but up to
that time they one had listened to them
but at this point suddenly Johnson
up to that time they were defending the
war that's right their policy shifts
that's right that's quite correct Jim in
fact from about night at the end of 1967
the stock market gets soft and the the
first big gold crisis occurs in March
1968 Oh at this point and then you have
a beginning a series of other influences
coming in of course there the influence
of the street to make this I think we
should not underestimate what what the
people did on the street and the people
on the street topple Johnson or played a
very important role so that's the third
out of the slave market that here you
have to two elements that come in new
elements one of the people in the street
and one of the ruling class people
coming in and telling Johnson that
something is very wrong with this war
and accelerating the process of putting
restraints and as becomes evident and
then late in that month now that I mean
you know as I say leaving the street
thing aside the the ruling class comes
in for the first time as a
countervailing power against the the
fascists and the bureaucracy the
fascists the militarists and carrying on
this war and I think what you have now
this at this moment is pay a fairly
naked confrontation of ruling corporate
liberals and fascist fascist militarists
and that that poor Nixon is sort of
caught in the middle but between the the
military the the AG news and the
Mitchells and and and these people
who've developed a strong vested
interest and of course their foreign
allies like to and and chummy Park and
John kai-shek and all they all the
riffraff that's been accumulated fascist
riffraff over over these losses on and
it's very very interesting because the
ruling classes the side of the war is
not worth continuing any longer that the
loss is far outweigh the gains it's the
come from and and my feeling is when
newspapers leading newspapers who are
and and and television networks no one
can tell me that they are the voices of
the people no one's supposed to look at
the advertising that goes on television
or
or newspapers they are the voice of
those people who exercise power and
influence and have the predominant
corporate wealth in this country there's
a fascinating confrontation and I think
it has occurred in other periods and
other countries and that's what we're
witnessing right now it seems to me this
is another angle I'd like to compliment
one France stuff about the political
impact of these papers well on the one
hand we are facing a division within the
elite which comes about because of
different interests that they have in
terms of allocation of resources great
objections to the way in which military
mismanagement in a sense some of the
discrediting parts of the elite
some of the great concern about the
what's happening with the Japanese and
some of the other allies it's
interesting for example the George ball
is one of the great dissenters will
who's George ball he's partly the man
who's both very European prone he's also
very Japanese prone and he argued for
years that the greatest threat to the
war was the destruction of American
Japanese alliance so this is what he
most feared that Nixon supported the war
for the same reasons he supported the
work for the same reason I think ball
was probably closer to that truth though
but there's another angle to this in
terms of the Pentagon Papers in terms of
what it opens up and that is when one
reads over these it hits one even though
one believed it before about what was
essentially a strategy of provocation
over the last 25 years by the United
States and Asia and that while there are
very basic ideological assumptions which
allow people to have augment at this
policy which didn't make them reflect
too much on it some of its consequences
there's a sense in which the the the
process is so consciously one of
creating a situation in Asia which
justifies our role there's a document
for example in the in the 54 in which
they're discussing the danger of
communism to Asia in which they're
consciously thinking out how do you
create a situation over this so it looks
like they're calling upon us for our
assistance how do you recreate the
concept of America as a defensive power
how do you justify our intricate
involvement other peoples internal
affairs and there's a kind of an
encouragement in a sense out of these
papers it seems to me but for the first
time these kinds of questions will have
to be asked in the American body politic
there's a strong
location throughout those papers and a
fear that if the American people really
knew how things were being done there
would be great opposition whether it was
Geneva or whether it was some of the
other state stands that the American
government took there would have been a
political argument even in the 50s it
seems to me if it had been known what we
actually did at Geneva and the covert
operations that the the calling of the
Geneva Accords a disaster and how you go
about changing them and and deciding all
along not to go along with them and it's
that level of public openness which is
feared in the Pentagon Papers which is
feared by the elite which is now
something that's going to have to be
faced and one doesn't come out of those
documents it seems to me with an
ideologies from within those kind of
people it's going to be very effective
against as an ideology not in terms of
the use of force but as an ideology
against this and I think there's some
encouragement I think people have
written off what the average American
person might take in terms of what his
government's going to do and I think
that's going to be hopefully I mean
there's a potential for this for a
reassessment and understanding of how
the government worked Peter the price of
Liberty is eternal vigilance and I don't
think we should be too sanguine about
the fact that these papers have been
have been published because I think what
France calls the ruling class is not
really interested in getting out of
Indochina when you say they're
interested in ending the war you have to
remember the whole Eisenhower Nixon
Republican posture towards Southeast
Asia was covert intervention through the
50s and that what Kennedy brought that
was new was going from covert to overt
bringing in the military in the Joint
Chiefs and so on I think Nixon's game
plan is and really for some time has
been to go back to covert intervention
and I find it very alarming that a lot
of the people who were very prominent in
covert operations men like Martin Hertz
and Gordon Jorgensen who were CIA
operatives in Southeast Asia in the late
50s are back there and into China now
and I think that Cambodia I think was
originally you know seen as a coup and
perhaps not really the full-scale
military intervention that we've seen
maybe something went a bit wrong
therefore the Nixon gameplan but if all
we see is that we go back from the overt
operations of the 60s to the covert
operations of the 1950's and meanwhile
the the big oil companies are drilling
that is establishing their Derrick's all
along the the coastline of Indochina the
problem is going to be worse it's going
to be more difficult so that we have to
realize just how painful and this
process of disengagement is going to be
and how hard those who are opposed to
the war we're gonna have to work
they can't just sit back now the
pentagon papers have been published Rick
yeah this for me that takes it back to a
question that Jim asked early on is why
did this things get published in such a
strange order there's if the if the main
conclusion that comes out of them these
papers is that any communism was there
as a driving force all along and may may
have moved from a somewhat defensive to
offensive phase in the early 60s it
still was the driving thing it's what
made people deny intelligence is what
made the made the outcomes be necessary
in a way if that's the the
generalization that comes out of them
then this is far different from the sort
of conclusions that were bearded
positions that were being argued before
remember first Vietnam debate was over
whether the war was too costly at least
at the elite level that's the way it was
phrased there wasn't anything wrong with
it it was a shear matter of dollars and
cents
then it became a mistake then maybe an
aberration when the when the war crimes
thing begins to emerge but still
aberration says it's not in the
mainstream of politics too when you go
to these things it says if you read them
seriously and take out their conclusion
that says that any communism is wrong
the Cold War is wrong the whole policy
is wrong I think that the times
scrambling of these things is an attempt
almost against itself a sign of its own
ambivalence to try to keep downplay that
element and keep it away from the
attention it was at least the mass
public maybe they'll do elite public can
be attentive to those things but it kept
away from the mass public in reston said
a few days after the first publications
that well we've done our role now by
publishing these things now it should go
back to the political realm like
The Times wanted to be out of it you
know and to phrase the whole thing in
terms of freedom of the press and to
just leave it there and to be happy with
it as a great constitutional issue it
seems to me a sign that they want that
they've done their part to get things
rolling but they don't want to stay with
it they don't want to carry through and
they just as soon have it go back to
someone covert elite where I might raise
one question about what you say though
is how far they do move in these
Pentagon Papers it seems to me it's
still at the level of workability and
the fact that the great problem was the
the the ignoring of the intelligence
particularly coming out of this group
who's associated with the Pentagon
Papers which led to mistakes and
disaster but I don't see the
reassessment in terms of of basic
assumptions about American involvement
or economic power or the use of military
power in a certain way what one sees I
think is not a reassessment in Thailand
not a reassessment in other parts of
Southeast Asia but a very basic criteria
of workability in the Indochina war
itself people followed the wrong
intelligence and they followed the wrong
advice I'm not convinced it goes any
further than that and that's why I think
the papers in a sense are explosive it's
written all over that what happened in
Indochina was meant to be in in for
Southeast Asia I mean those initial
documents linked Vietnam to the pattern
in Southeast Asia I would think you know
that I would sort of you know say that
even though there is that limited scope
of work ability constantly you hear this
reiterated and of course this has been a
long-term sort of theory of the left
about was the war of presents is that it
was a laboratory in these many many ways
perhaps why they were driven on is they
felt this was the test the major test
you know this is where we would prove to
the world that we could you know defeat
the forces of revolution not just in
Asia but throughout Latin America and
Africa and or at least learn how to or
at least learn how to I mean and and the
one clear fact is when you look at the
whole military research and development
programs that I got it
Mendes boost from what was going on in
Vietnam and I would think that that you
know the the brunt of or at least in one
of the issues that that would have to be
confronted in this type of reassessment
would go back to what Gregg said is this
whole anti-communist policy and it it's
sort of an ambiguous thing I think that
what you see with the times is what you
see with a similar type of ambiguity
with you know they're liberals like full
brighten and Proxmire I mean these
people to look about as Proxmire puts it
he calls himself a parsimonious hawk I
mean he wants he thinks the United
States does have a national security
problem but it has to handle this more
efficiently and Fulbright is also for
containing communism but it has to be
done in a more humane with more
civilized manner without so much of
brutality so so I think that this kind
of contradiction that rip points out in
the New York Times is something that
that is implicit in this one wing of the
u.s. ruling class that's it's kind of
the point I was trying to get that in a
sense you can read the Pentagon
documents in the record striking records
one wouldn't assume this is the
conclusion as a defense of expertise in
government what right but the stress on
anti-communism which comes through is
this bewilderment in in this report
because it is obfuscating the
decision-making process that should have
been taking place and it's at this level
which i think the system is very
mystified in this report that that that
you don't have to go beyond that you if
you could in these Pentagon Papers
remove the machismo the threat on will
and stamina that some of these experts
head or the obfuscation of the policy
that came through for a variety of
different reasons and you had people who
knew what was going on and these are the
ones who are actually making the
decisions then you would have a rational
and effective government and that is why
this is very much an elite document it
isn't going to get much further than
that
that's why I stressed both its
limitations and the recognition of the
kind of document that really is and the
kinds of people that put it together
because Ellsberg seems to me the very
symbol of this kind of thinking which is
that's a technocratic approach if only
we could remove domestic emotionalism
and emotionalism in the decision-making
and this incredible rhetoric and the
military simplicity's we have a
different kind of government and I think
there is where the Great Divide is going
to occur in the debate in American
politics we've run out of time again
obviously these discussions are not
going to stop here either among the
people in this room or among the people
listening but I do want to thank all of
you for coming in once again and and
sharing with us your analysis and
interpretation
this program was produced by KPFA
Pacifica Radio for Northern California
and distributed by Pacifica program
service in Berkeley all rights are
reserved